Python for Web Developers   
Learning Journal




















Objective
We find that the students who do particularly well in our courses are those who practice metacognition. Metacognition is the art of thinking about thinking; developing a deeper understanding of your own thought processes. With the help of this Learning Journal, you’ll broaden your metacognitive knowledge and skills by reflecting on what you learn in this course. 


Thanks to this Learning Journal, when you finish the course you’ll have a complete and detailed record of your learning journey and progress over time. We really recommend that you take the time to complete this Journal; students do better in CF courses and in the working world as a result!


Directions
First complete the pre-work section before you start your course. Then, once you’ve begun learning, take time after each Exercise to return to this Journal and respond to the prompts. 


There will be 3 to 5 prompts per Exercise, and we recommend spending about 10 to 15 minutes in total answering them. Don’t overthink it—just write whatever comes to mind! 


Also make sure that, once you’ve started filling this document in, you upload it as a deliverable on the platform. This is so that your mentor can also see your Journal and how you’re progressing over time. Don’t worry though—what you write here won’t affect how you’re graded for the Exercise tasks. The learning journal is mostly for you and your self-evaluation!


Pre-Work: Before You Start the Course


Reflection questions (to complete before your first mentor call)


1. What experiences have you had with coding and/or programming so far? What other experiences (programming-related or not) have you had that may help you as you progress through this course?
   1. With over 25 years of diverse experience in the tech industry, I've navigated an exciting journey from Mainframe development to cutting-edge Full Stack Web Development. Starting with a Master's in Computer Science in 1997. I started my professional career as a Cobol, CICS, DB2 developer. From junior to senior to tech support helping and training other developers. 
   2. I then migrated to Database Administration and was an IBM DB2 DBA for about 5 years. My mainframe era honed my skills in team communication and Fortune 500 complex IT system understanding.
   3.  The drive for continuous growth led me to an international software company, expanding my expertise into sales and marketing.
   4.  I then ventured into entrepreneurship, capitalizing on emerging trends like affiliate marketing, internet advertising, and mobile app development. Successfully launching 300 iPhone apps and an Amazon product, I've demonstrated adaptability and foresight in rapidly changing markets.


2. What do you know about Python already? What do you want to know?
   1. I’ve taken multiple Courses on multiple languages (Java/J2EE, python, JS, React, Solidity/Blockchain, etc.)  over the course of the last 10 years. So I am pretty comfortable with programming languages, I just think i’ve been learning too many different languages and I believe I should stop spreading my knowledge and start focussing on one tech stack that will provide me with a good career.
3. What challenges do you think may come up while you take this course? What will help you face them? Think of specific spaces, people, and times of day of week that might be favorable to your facing challenges and growing. Plan for how to solve challenges that arise. 
   1. The challenges that I expect are the same I've faced before. Learning too many different technologies and not focusing enough on 1 tech stack which would make me a better developer in that tech, instead of being a mediocre dev in multiple techs.
   2. Timing the end of this course will also be challenging as I will be very busy with my current work schedule, but I don’t expect to find any challenges other than timing. 
   3. I will figure out the appropriate schedule to finish this course on time and delivering quality work.


Remember, you can always refer to Exercise 1.4 of the Orientation course if you’re not sure whom to reach out to for help and support.


Exercise 1.1: Getting Started with Python 
Learning Goals


* Summarize the uses and benefits of Python for web development
* Prepare your developer environment for programming with Python


Reflection Questions


1. In your own words, what is the difference between frontend and backend web development? If you were hired to work on backend programming for a web application, what kinds of operations would you be working on?
   1. Frontend is all that has to do with the user interface and backend as to do with the backbone of the application like how to access and process the data. If I was going to be hired as a back-end developer, I would probably be working on an API or an ORM accessing and processing data manipulation/transformation.


2. Imagine you’re working as a full-stack developer in the near future. Your team is asking for your advice on whether to use JavaScript or Python for a project, and you think Python would be the better choice. How would you explain the similarities and differences between the two languages to your team? Drawing from what you learned in this Exercise, what reasons would you give to convince your team that Python is the better option? 
(Hint: refer to the Exercise section “The Benefits of Developing with Python”)
* I would say that Python is probably more flexible than JS as it is more opened to other technologies, like Data analysis, AI, machine learning, robotic, image processing and simple scripting in general. If the development staff is more familiar with Javascript (for front-end) and Python with Django for back-end, this seems like a better option to start a new development. But if the staff is more comfortable with JS and not too familiar with Python, then a full MERN or MEAN application should be considered.


3. Now that you’ve had an introduction to Python, write down 3 goals you have for yourself and your learning during this Achievement. You can reflect on the following questions if it helps you. What do you want to learn about Python? What do you want to get out of this Achievement? Where or what do you see yourself working on after you complete this Achievement?
   1. I would like to see the difference between developing a full-stack application with Python/Django so that I can compare it with my recent work on MERN and MEAN Applications. I haven’t used Python in years, so I want to figure out which tech is better for a typical Web application. I am hoping to discover that Django will make the the Routing, security and Database access more convenient than Node, Express, Next-js, Passport.js, Oauth.js, etc.    


Exercise 1.2: Data Types in Python
Learning Goals


* Explain variables and data types in Python
* Summarize the use of objects in Python
* Create a data structure for your Recipe app


Reflection Questions


1. Imagine you’re having a conversation with a future colleague about whether to use the iPython Shell instead of Python’s default shell. What reasons would you give to explain the benefits of using the iPython Shell over the default one?
   1. Ipython offers additional features like:
      1. Color Coding
      2. autoComplete


2. Python has a host of different data types that allow you to store and organize information. List 4 examples of data types that Python recognizes, briefly define them, and indicate whether they are scalar or non-scalar.


Data type
	Definition
	Scalar or Non-Scalar?
	Int
	Integer Numbers including negatives
	Scalar
	Float
	Decimal Numbers including negatives
	Scalar
	List
	Mutable Array of objects
	Non-Scalar
	Tuple
	Immutable Array of objects
	Non-Scalar
	



3. A frequent question at job interviews for Python developers is: what is the difference between lists and tuples in Python? Write down how you would respond.
   1. Lists are mutable objects which means we can add, remove, modify their elements.
   2. Tuples are immutable Which mean we can NOT modify them,  we can only add one more element at the beginning or at the end. For example:
      1. >>> a = (1, 2, 3)
      2.  You want to add the value 4 at the end:
      3. a = a + (4, )
      4. You want to add the value 0 at the beginning:
      5. a = (0, ) + a
   3. Additionally tuples have the advantage of being faster to read and access, especially when large amounts of data are involved.


4. In the task for this Exercise, you decided what you thought was the most suitable data structure for storing all the information for a recipe. Now, imagine you’re creating a language-learning app that helps users memorize vocabulary through flashcards. Users can input vocabulary words, definitions, and their category (noun, verb, etc.) into the flashcards. They can then quiz themselves by flipping through the flashcards. Think about the necessary data types and what would be the most suitable data structure for this language-learning app. Between tuples, lists, and dictionaries, which would you choose? Think about their respective advantages and limitations, and where flexibility might be useful if you were to continue developing the language-learning app beyond vocabulary memorization. 
   1. This example seems to be similar than the recipe example, so I would store all the information for the flashcard in a Dictionary Object and each Dictionary Object would be included in a List of Flashcards. 
Exercise 1.3: Functions and Other Operations in Python
Learning Goals


* Implement conditional statements in Python to determine program flow
* Use loops to reduce time and effort in Python programming
* Write functions to organize Python code


Reflection Questions


1. In this Exercise, you learned how to use if-elif-else statements to run different tasks based on conditions that you define. Now practice that skill by writing a script for a simple travel app using an if-elif-else statement for the following situation: 

   * The script should ask the user where they want to travel. 
   * The user’s input should be checked for 3 different travel destinations that you define. 
   * If the user’s input is one of those 3 destinations, the following statement should be printed: “Enjoy your stay in ______!”
   * If the user’s input is something other than the defined destinations, the following statement should be printed: “Oops, that destination is not currently available.”
        
Write your script here. (Hint: remember what you learned about indents!)


destination = input(“Enter your Destination : “)
available_destinations = [“paris”, “london”, “new york’]
If (destination.lower()  in available_destinations):
     print(“Enjoy your stay in”, destination)
else:
    print(“Oops! That destination is not available”) 












	

	

   2. Imagine you’re at a job interview for a Python developer role. The interviewer says “Explain logical operators in Python”. Draft how you would respond.
   1. Logical operators are essential in programming as they allow multiple conditions to be joined and tested simultaneously. The core of computer programming is to test conditions and to take different actions based on the results (True or False which is historically also the core of binary programming 0 or 1).


   3. What are functions in Python? When and why are they useful?
   1. Functions in python (and most of the other main languages) are also at the core of programming. They allow you to gather blocks of codes to be called as many times as necessary to execute  tasks. They are useful to keep the code clean and DRY (Don’t repeat Yourself). Especially for repetitive tasks.


   4. In the section for Exercise 1 in this Learning Journal, you were asked in question 3 to set some goals for yourself while you complete this course.  In preparation for your next mentor call, make some notes on how you’ve progressed towards your goals so far.
   1. I haven’t progressed more than before as I already knew what we are going through. This was just a nice refresher course on python which I’ve learned 2-3 years ago and haven’t practiced much since then.
Exercise 1.4: File Handling in Python
Learning Goals


   * Use files to store and retrieve data in Python


Reflection Questions


   1. Why is file storage important when you’re using Python? What would happen if you didn’t store local files?


   2. In this Exercise you learned about the pickling process with the pickle.dump() method. What are pickles? In which situations would you choose to use pickles and why? 


   3. In Python, what function do you use to find out which directory you’re currently in? What if you wanted to change your current working directory?


   4. Imagine you’re working on a Python script and are worried there may be an error in a block of code. How would you approach the situation to prevent the entire script from terminating due to an error?


   5. You’re now more than halfway through Achievement 1! Take a moment to reflect on your learning in the course so far. How is it going? What’s something you’re proud of so far? Is there something you’re struggling with? What do you need more practice with? Feel free to use these notes to guide your next mentor call. 
Exercise 1.5: Object-Oriented Programming in Python
Learning Goals


   * Apply object-oriented programming concepts to your Recipe app


Reflection Questions


   1. In your own words, what is object-oriented programming? What are the benefits of OOP?


   2. What are objects and classes in Python? Come up with a real-world example to illustrate how objects and classes work.


   3. In your own words, write brief explanations of the following OOP concepts; 100 to 200 words per method is fine. 


Method
	Description
	Inheritance
	

	Polymorphism
	

	Operator Overloading
	

	

Exercise 1.6: Connecting to Databases in Python


Learning Goals


   * Create a MySQL database for your Recipe app


Reflection Questions


   1. What are databases and what are the advantages of using them?


   2. List 3 data types that can be used in MySQL and describe them briefly:




Data type
	Definition
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

   3.  In what situations would SQLite be a better choice than MySQL?


   4. Think back to what you learned in the Immersion course. What do you think about the differences between JavaScript and Python as programming languages?


   5. Now that you’re nearly at the end of Achievement 1, consider what you know about Python so far. What would you say are the limitations of Python as a programming language?


Exercise 1.7: Finalizing Your Python Program
Learning Goals


   * Interact with a database using an object-relational mapper
   * Build your final command-line Recipe application




Reflection Questions


   1. What is an Object Relational Mapper and what are the advantages of using one?


   2. By this point, you’ve finished creating your Recipe app. How did it go? What’s something in the app that you did well with? If you were to start over, what’s something about your app that you would change or improve?


   3. Imagine you’re at a job interview. You’re asked what experience you have creating an app using Python. Taking your work for this Achievement as an example, draft how you would respond to this question.
 
   4. You’ve finished Achievement 1! Before moving on to Achievement 2, take a moment to reflect on your learning in the course so far: 
   1. What went well during this Achievement? 
   2. What’s something you’re proud of? 
   3. What was the most challenging aspect of this Achievement? 
   4. Did this Achievement meet your expectations? Did it give you the confidence to start working with your new Python skills?
   5. What’s something you want to keep in mind to help you do your best in Achievement 2?


Well done—you’ve now completed the Learning Journal for Achievement 1. As you’ll have seen, a little metacognition can go a long way!


Pre-Work: Before You Start Achievement 2


In the final part of the learning journal for Achievement 1, you were asked if there’s anything—on reflection—that you’d keep in mind and do similarly or differently during Achievement 2. Think about these questions again:


   * Was your study routine effective during Achievement 1? If not, what will you do differently during Achievement 2?
   * Reflect on your learning and project work for Achievement 1. What were you most proud of? How will you repeat or build on this in Achievement 2?
   * What difficulties did you encounter in the last Achievement? How did you deal with them? How could this experience prepare you for difficulties in Achievement 2?


Note down your answers and discuss them with your mentor in a call if you like.


Remember that can always refer to Exercise 1.4 of the Orientation course if you’re not sure whom to reach out to for help and support.




Exercise 2.1: Getting Started with Django


Learning Goals


   * Explain MVT architecture and compare it with MVC
   * Summarize Django’s benefits and drawbacks 
   * Install and get started with Django


Reflection Questions


   1. Suppose you’re a web developer in a company and need to decide if you’ll use vanilla (plain) Python for a project, or a framework like Django instead. What are the advantages and drawbacks of each?


   2. In your own words, what is the most significant advantage of Model View Template (MVT) architecture over Model View Controller (MVC) architecture?


   3. Now that you’ve had an introduction to the Django framework, write down three goals you have for yourself and your learning process during this Achievement. You can reflect on the following questions if it helps:
   * What do you want to learn about Django? 
   * What do you want to get out of this Achievement? 
   * Where or what do you see yourself working on after you complete this Achievement?




Exercise 2.2: Django Project Set Up


Learning Goals


   * Describe the basic structure of a Django project 
   * Summarize the difference between projects and apps
   * Create a Django project and run it locally
   * Create a superuser for a Django web application


Reflection Questions


   1. Suppose you’re in an interview. The interviewer gives you their company’s website as an example, asking you to convert the website and its different parts into Django terms. How would you proceed? For this question, you can think about your dream company and look at their website for reference. 
(Hint: In the Exercise, you saw the example of the CareerFoundry website in the Project and Apps section.)


   2. In your own words, describe the steps you would take to deploy a basic Django application locally on your system. 


   3. Do some research about the Django admin site and write down how you’d use it during your web application development.


Exercise 2.3: Django Models


Learning Goals


   * Discuss Django models, the “M” part of Django’s MVT architecture
   * Create apps and models representing different parts of your web application 
   * Write and run automated tests


Reflection Questions


   1. Do some research on Django models. In your own words, write down how Django models work and what their benefits are.


   2. In your own words, explain why it is crucial to write test cases from the beginning of a project. You can take an example project to explain your answer.


Exercise 2.4: Django Views and Templates


Learning Goals


   * Summarize the process of creating views, templates, and URLs 
   * Explain how the “V” and “T” parts of MVT architecture work
   * Create a frontend page for your web application


Reflection Questions


   1. Do some research on Django views. In your own words, use an example to explain how Django views work.


   2. Imagine you’re working on a Django web development project, and you anticipate that you’ll have to reuse lots of code in various parts of the project. In this scenario, will you use Django function-based views or class-based views, and why?


   3.  Read Django’s documentation on the Django template language and make some notes on its basics.


Exercise 2.5: Django MVT Revisited


Learning Goals


   * Add images to the model and display them on the frontend of your application
   * Create complex views with access to the model
   * Display records with views and templates




Reflection Questions


   1. In your own words, explain Django static files and how Django handles them.


   2. Look up the following two Django packages on Django’s official documentation and/or other trusted sources. Write a brief description of each.




Package
	Description
	ListView
	

	DetailView
	

	





   3. You’re now more than halfway through Achievement 2! Take a moment to reflect on your learning in the course so far. How is it going? What’s something you’re proud of so far? Is there something you’re struggling with? What do you need more practice with? You can use these notes to guide your next mentor call. 


Exercise 2.6: User Authentication in Django


Learning Goals


   * Create authentication for your web application
   * Use GET and POST methods 
   * Password protect your web application’s views


Reflection Questions


   1. In your own words, write down the importance of incorporating authentication into an application. You can take an example application to explain your answer. 


   2. In your own words, explain the steps you should take to create a login for your Django web application. 


   3. Look up the following three Django functions on Django’s official documentation and/or other trusted sources and write a brief description of each.




Function
	Description
	authenticate()
	

	redirect()
	

	include()
	

	











Exercise 2.7: Data Analysis and Visualization in Django


Learning Goals


   * Work on elements of two-way communication like creating forms and buttons
   * Implement search and visualization (reports/charts) features
   * Use QuerySet API, DataFrames (with pandas), and plotting libraries (with matplotlib)


Reflection Questions


   1. Consider your favorite website/application (you can also take CareerFoundry). Think about the various data that your favorite website/application collects. Write down how analyzing the collected data could help the website/application. 


   2. Read the Django official documentation on QuerySet API. Note down the different ways in which you can evaluate a QuerySet.


   3. In the Exercise, you converted your QuerySet to DataFrame. Now do some research on the advantages and disadvantages of QuerySet and DataFrame, and explain the ways in which DataFrame is better for data processing.




Exercise 2.8: Deploying a Django Project
Learning Goals


   * Enhance user experience and look and feel of your web application using CSS and JS
   * Deploy your Django web application on a web server 
   * Curate project deliverables for your portfolio


Reflection Questions


   1. Explain how you can use CSS and JavaScript in your Django web application.


   2. In your own words, explain the steps you’d need to take to deploy your Django web application. 






   3. (Optional) Connect with a few Django web developers through LinkedIn or any other network. Ask them for their tips on creating a portfolio to showcase Python programming and Django skills. Think about which tips could help you improve your portfolio.


   4. You’ve now finished Achievement 2 and, with it, the whole course! Take a moment to reflect on your learning:
   1. What went well during this Achievement? 
   2. What’s something you’re proud of? 
   3. What was the most challenging aspect of this Achievement? 
   4. Did this Achievement meet your expectations? Did it give you the confidence to start working with your new Django skills?


Well done—you’ve now completed the Learning Journal for the whole course.